---
layout: post
title:  "Java 9 Part 1 - Modules"
date:   2017-04-13 22:18:00
categories: dev,java,functional-programming
comments: true
published: false
---

## Introduction

We all know why `modules` are super important.  Modules are the building blocks of `microservices`! Modules the the building blocks of a well organized application.  Nomatter if you are writing in a dynamic language static language, modules are a super important part of your application! Modules are enforcing the SRP the single responsibility principle. You can call every function a module, functional programming is around modules.  OK you get me modules are important, and this is why we are going to focus on them in this part of our tutorial.

Our plan:

Step 1: Download java 9 from scratch and install

Step 2: Concept - Describe how our module filename should be called

Step 3: Concept - Describe how our module filepath should be

Step 4: Code our module descriptor file `module-info.java`

Step 5: Add code to our module

Step 6: Compile our module

Step 7: Run our module

## Step 1: Download java 9

Goto: [https://jdk9.java.net/download/](https://jdk9.java.net/download/) and click on the `jdk` relevant to your favorite and used `OS`.

and after download just click it to install (if you are on `macos`) and verify you have it installed:

```bash
tomerb@tomerb-mac.local:~$ java --version
java 9-ea
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 9-ea+164)
Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 9-ea+164, mixed mode)
tomerb@tomerb-mac.local:~$ cd ~/tmp
tomerb@tomerb-mac.local:~$ mkdir -p ~/tmp/java9-modules
tomerb@tomerb-mac.local:~$ cd ~/tmp/java9-modules
```

## Step 2: Module filename

In `java9` you need to have a specific file name by convention in order to define modules, yes! a specific filename.  That filename should be called: `module-info.java`.

## Step 3: Module filepath

Now, where do you put this file `module-info.java`, well, by convention you place it in a folder having the same name as your module name.  So if your module name is 
 
 `com.me.mymodule` 
 
 Then your module that is your `module-info.java` should be placed at:
 
 `src/com.me.mymodule` path
 
 which makes your `module-info.java` file placed at:
 
 `src/com.me.mymodule/module-info.java` path.
 
Go it? `<module-path> == <module name>` !
 
## Step 4: Let's code a module

Now that we know what should be our module `filename` and our module `filepath` let's code a module with that namign and folder convention in hand:

```bash
tomerb@tomerb-mac.local:~/tmp/java9-modules$ mkdir -p src/com.me.mymodule
tomerb@tomerb-mac.local:~/tmp/java9-modules$ vi src/com.me.mymodule/module-info.java
```

```java
module com.me.mymodule { }
```

this is it we have a module! (with no real interesting implementation, that's for next steps)

## Step 5: Add some code to our module! 

In this step we are going to add some code to our module! so let's create a new `java` file in the same folder as our module.

```bash
$ mkdir -p src/com.me.mymodule/com/me/mymodule
$ vi src/com.me.mymodule/com/me/mymodule/Main.java
```

Note the strange folder name we place our source code, is it strange? we first enter the path our module resides in and then we create the full package name for our source code in this case `/com/me/mymodule` this is on top of `/com.me.mymodule`.  It's just that our source file belongs to our module and the module is already in a standard modules dir by convention of `java9`

So the source for `Main.java` would be a simple hello world source.

```java
package com.me.mymodule;

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello World from Module! :)"); // nothing special here, standard java < 9 class.
    }
}
```

## Step 6: Compile our module
 
First make the `mods` dir (that we would further on pass to: `java --module-path`):

```bash
$ mkdir -p mods/com.me.mymodule
$ javac -d mods/com.me.mymodule \
          src/com.me.mymodule/module-info.java \
          src/com.me.mymodule/com/me/mymodule/Main.java
```

Nest we cross our fingers, and let the compiler - compile!

## Step 7: Run our module!

```bash
$ java --module-path mods -m com.me.mymodule/com.me.mymodule.Main
Hello World from Module! :)
```

## Summary

In this part we have download from scratch `java9` created a module, added a source file to it and ran it.  We saw that there is some naming convention to be followed while creating a module path and similar when creating the source code.